PLATFORM AS A SERVICE
PaaS delivers the infrastructure and middleware components that enable developers, IT administrators, and end users to build, integrate, migrate, deploy, secure, and manage mobile and web applications. To aid productivity, PaaS offers ready-to-use programming components that allow developers to build new capabilities into their applications, including innovative technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), chatbots, blockchain, and the Internet of Things (IoT).
PaaS services also include solutions for analysts, end users, and professional IT administrators, including big data analytics, content management, database management, systems management, and security. PaaS provides all the fundamental benefits of cloud computing, from transparent pricing and turnkey provisioning to on-demand scalability and disaster recovery—all managed in a consistent manner via easy-to-use dashboards. As a result, businesses can:
•	Standardize and simplify IT operations
•	Speed business innovation with ready-to-use solutions
•	Reduce operational, security, and governance risks

The emergence of cloud computing changed the applications equation, and application development platforms became ideal candidates to simplify this complexity. In the mid-2000s, providers began offering an integrated set of middleware cloud services delivered via standardized APIs: PaaS was born. However, in those pioneering days, providers essentially provided only server, storage, and network services, and PaaS solutions were suited only to low-risk, low-requirement development environments. With application development success, use cases evolved to lightweight production workloads, and with that transition, enterprise requirements increased. For enterprises, predictable and consistent performance that ensures business continuity is one of the most important production workload requirements. These capabilities are backed by explicit commitments to service-level agreements (SLAs). To be truly effective, both the PaaS and information-as-a-service (IaaS) layers must work together. Good examples include scalability and fault tolerance without system shutdown and restart. Enterprises also have a higher standard for exerting governance. Across PaaS, it’s not enough to prevent threats; it’s also necessary to demonstrate that the threats were thwarted. As cloud usage expands, configurations in both production and development drift from standards and vulnerabilities emerge. Enterprise PaaS provides comprehensive and consistent logging and audit tools.
Most IT decisions are justified according to three principles—efficiency, effectiveness, and risk reduction. Here’s how PaaS solutions deliver on each of those principles:
•	IT efficiency: PaaS speeds provisioning, increases automation, standardizes deployments, eliminates routine tasks, and improves scalability.
•	Business innovation: PaaS drives top- and bottom-line results by allowing IT to be more responsive to business opportunities, for example, mobile applications, support for more innovative user experiences (chatbots), more trusted transactions (blockchain), faster release cycles (containers and APIs), and data discovery (analytics).
•	Risk reduction: PaaS strengthens and simplifies security and speeds responses to evolving threats across heterogeneous IT components. It increases business resiliency and reduces downtime while preventing data loss and speeding recovery.

One PaaS—Multiple Clouds and Providers
In evaluating PaaS solutions, it is vital to consider how your own organization will evolve over time. At the rate of change in technology today, solutions that support maximum flexibility are at an advantage. In other words, it is important to consider whether a PaaS provider has a true enterprise strategy. For example, one key consideration is multicloud support. According to IDC, 75 percent of enterprise IT organizations were using multicloud solutions in 2017. The percentage of multicloud usage will increase to 85 percent in 2018. The flexibility to move workloads across on-premises, public, and private cloud environments enables businesses to mitigate risk, dynamically leverage optimal pricing, and meet evolving regulatory and governance requirements.
To ensure you can take full advantage of the promises of PaaS as your strategy evolves, consider workload and development options that
•	Support multicloud portability: A multicloud PaaS strategy requires easy workload portability across databases, containers, open source, and Java.
•	Unify controls across your IT portfolio: Multiple operational platforms are a reality. For operational excellence, use a single toolset to actively control security and management across clouds and on premises.
•	Do not force vendor lock-in: PaaS solutions built on industry standards will keep IT nimble going forward, while those that force vendor lock-in face obsolescence and rewrites as technologies, regulations, and business conditions evolve.

Benefits
•	Faster time to market: With PaaS, there’s no need to purchase and install the hardware and software you’ll use to build and maintain your application development platform and no need for development teams to wait while you do this. You simply tap into the cloud service provider’s PaaS resources and begin developing immediately.
•	Faster, easier, less-risky adoption of a wider range of resources: PaaS platforms typically include access to a greater variety of choices up and down the application development stack—operating systems, middleware, and databases, and tools such as code libraries and app components—than you can affordably or practically maintain on-premises. It also lets you test new operating systems, languages, and tools without risk—that is, without having to invest in the infrastructure required to run them.
•	Easy, cost-effective scalability: If an application developed and hosted on-premises starts getting more traffic, you’ll need to purchase more computing, storage, and even network hardware to meet the demand, which you may not be able to do quickly enough and can be wasteful (since you typically purchase more than you need). With PaaS, you can scale on-demand by purchasing just the amount of additional capacity you need.
•	Lower costs: Because there’s no infrastructure to build, your upfront costs are lower. Costs are also lower and more predictable because most PaaS providers charge customers based on usage.

PaaS, IaaS, and SaaS
•	With IaaS, your cloud provider offers access to ‘raw’ computing resources, such as servers, storage, and networking, but you’re responsible for the platform and application software.
•	With PaaS, your provider delivers and manages the entire platform infrastructure; you are abstracted from the lower-level details of the environment, and you use the platform to develop and deploy your applications.
•	SaaS is software you use via the cloud, as if it were installed on your computer (and parts of it may, in fact, be installed on your computer). SaaS applications reside on the cloud network, and users can store and analyze data and collaborate on projects thorough the application.

AIPaaS
•	For a few years now, cloud service providers have offered Artificial-Intelligence-as-a-Service (AIaaS) that lets you ‘tap into’ individual AI capabilities without investing in the supporting infrastructure required to run it or the in-house expertise required to operate, manage, and maintain it.
•	But the leading cloud service providers have introduced comprehensive AI-Platform-as-a-Service (AIPaaS) offerings that include a platform for delivering AI-enriched applications. Typically, AIPaaS includes infrastructure and data storage hardened to provide the computing power and voluminous storage AI requires, pretrained machine learning models you can use as-is or customize, and APIs for integrating specific AI capabilities (such as facial recognition or text-to-speech conversion) into your application. 
•	Open source PaaS and Kubernetes
•	An open source PaaS allows developers and users to contribute and share source code and extensions. Cloud Foundry (link resides outside IBM) and OpenShift (link resides outside IBM) are two popular open source PaaS platforms.
•	Cloud Foundry allows you to deploy and run apps on your own computing infrastructure or by using a PaaS deployed by a commercial Cloud Foundry cloud provider. A broad vendor community contributes to and supports Cloud Foundry. OpenShift is Red Hat’s cloud computing PaaS offering. OpenShift is built around Docker containers orchestrated and managed by Kubernetes on a Red Hat Enterprise foundation.
•	There is often confusion about whether Kubernetes is a PaaS. Kubernetes is an open source, container orchestration tool that is critical to the managing of cloud applications. It provides some features common to PaaS offerings, such as deployment, scaling, load balancing, logging, and monitoring, but is not a traditional, all-inclusive PaaS.

Cloud native and PaaS
•	PaaS is experiencing strong growth. Gartner predicts the PaaS market will have doubled in size from 2018 and 2022, and that it will become the prevailing platform delivery model moving forward.
•	At the same time, “cloud native” apps are becoming pervasive. Cloud native refers to an application designed to run in a cloud environment that automatically reflects the key elements of cloud (agility, scalability, etc.).
•	Cloud native is less about where an application resides and more about how it is built and deployed, but cloud native apps generally follow a microservices architecture and make use of such cloud technologies as containers. Because cloud native applications typically include new and modern methods of application development, using a PaaS model makes developing cloud native apps much easier, and allows you to innovate much faster.

PaaS and IBM Cloud
•	IBM provides a rich and scalable PaaS for developing cloud native applications from scratch or modernizing existing applications to benefit from the flexibility and scalability of the cloud. Services include IBM Cloud Kubernetes Service, a fully-managed container orchestration solution; Red Hat OpenShift on IBM Cloud; IBM Cloudant and IBM Cloud Databases for PostgreSQL; and much more.
•	IBM Cloud Foundry is IBM’s version of the open source PaaS for building, testing, deploying, and scaling applications. And the IBM Watson platform lets you deploy AI applications wherever your data resides—on any cloud or on your own private cloud platform.
